User-defined types allow you
to create your own data types.
They can have elements
with distinct types.
And they make your life as a
programmer really a lot easier.
User-defined types
can also serve
as building blocks for more
sophisticated data types.
We're going to introduce them
with a motivating example.
So suppose you
have an array which
you want to pass
into a function,
and you want to compute its
mean and standard deviation.
How are you going to do that?
One way to do this is
to define a subroutine.
Since actually, we want to
compute multiple values.
And using out or
in-out intent arguments
is the only way to do that.
So we pass in data as
a one-dimensional array
and of course, intent in.
And we pass in mean standard
deviation and n, and those
of intent out, because
those are supposed to hold
the values we want to compute.
Mean and standard
deviation are real,
and n is, of course, an integer.
And then we compute
the values for the mean
and the standard deviation.
So that's easy.
And of course it would work.
We compile the code,
run the application,
and we get the expected result.
So yes it works, but
is it a good solution?
Well, suppose that
you want to compute
more descriptive statistics
measures such as, for instance,
the minimum and the maximum,
or the median of our data set.
The current approach
would force us to have
one argument for each measure.
And that gets out
of hand pretty soon.
And the code is not
so easy to maintain,
and it's going to get confusing.
So there should be a better way.
And yes, there is.
And that's where
user-defined types come in.
To define the type, we use
the keyword type followed
by the name of the new type.
So in this particular
example, statistics.
Then we list all the
elements of that type.
So first, their type and
then the name of the element.
In this case, we
have three of them.
Mean and standard
deviation, both are real.
And n, which is an integer.
And finally we have end type
followed by the name again.
So this just defines
a type, nothing more.
If you want the
variable of that type,
we can declare that as well.
And then we would use type with
the statistics in parentheses.
So with name of the
type, and then of course,
the variable which
we're defining,
which is stats in this case.
The subroutine
signature also changes.
Rather than having three
separate arguments, one
for the mean value, one
for the standard deviation,
and the last one for the
number of elements n,
we just have a single argument.
Stats and its type is indeed a
user-defined type, statistics.
And just like before, the intent
is of course out, because you
are going to compute the values
of the elements of stats,
in our subroutine, compute_stats
Apart from that, the computation
is, of course, the same.
The only thing which
we need to do here
is, we need to
initialize the elements
of the stats user-defined type.
And we can access an element
of a user-defined type using
a percentage sign.
So stats%n refers to the element
with name n in the user-defined
type statistics.
And stats, of course, is a
variable of that user-defined
type, and very similar for
stats%mean and stats%stddev
standard deviation.
We would also have to make
the appropriate changes
in our programme itself, where
the subroutine compute_stats is
actually called.
So it gets a single
argument of type statistics.
But if you look at the
computation of, for instance,
standard deviation in our
subroutine compute_stats then
you see that it gets less
readable in the sense that we
have to use stats%n each time we
want the number of data values.
And that makes reading our
formula a lot more difficult.
So there is a good
solution to that as well.
We can use an associate
statement to create an alias
for stats%n which is a bit
inconvenient in our formula.
So we want to refer to
that using the alias n.
So within the block for
the associate statement,
we can use n instead of stats n,
and that simplifies our formula
considerably, and brings it
back to what it was before.
So this is just a convenience,
but it makes our code much more
readable.
Perhaps it's more elegant to
have a function rather than
a subroutine in this situation,
since we are computing
something on input, which is
our one-dimensional array data,
and we're producing
something new.
Remember, it's intent out.
And that could also just be
the return value of a function.
So we can just do that by
having result stats of type,
type statistics.
And apart from that,
it's the same thing.
So now, rather than do
a call of a subroutine,
we can actually just do a
function call in our main
programme.
And in a way,
that's more elegant
than the previous solution.
User-defined types
are not only very
convenient for the
programmer and the basis
for sophisticated
data structures,
but as we'll see
later, they also
form the basis for
object-oriented programming
in Fortran.